Acute epiglottitis and bacterial
tracheitis are both life-threatening upper airway infections,
but they behave very differently, and as
an RT,
recognizing those differences can save a
life.
Let's start with acute epiglottitis.
This is a rapid-onset inflammation of the
epiglottis, most
often caused by bacteria like Haemophilus
influenzae type B.
The key problem here is supraglottic
swelling.
The airway can close quickly, sometimes
within hours.
Clinically, these patients look toxic.
You'll see high fever, drooling,
dysphagia,
and the classic tripod positioning.
One of the biggest red flags?
They don't want to lie down.
And importantly, stridor may be present,
but coughing is usually minimal.
Now compare that to bacterial tracheitis.
This condition affects the trachea itself,
often following a viral
infection.
The airway obstruction here is caused by
thick, purulent secretions
and mucosal sloughing, not just swelling.
These patients may initially look like
croup, but then suddenly
worsen.
You'll see high fever, stridor, and
a toxic appearance, but unlike
epiglottitis,
they often have a productive cough and
significant secretions.
Here's the key clinical distinction.
Epiglottitis is a swelling problem above
the airway.
Bacterial tracheitis is a secretion and
obstruction problem within the airway.
From an RT perspective, both are airway
emergencies,
but your priorities differ slightly.
With epiglottitis, do not agitate the
patient.
Avoid unnecessary procedures.
The priority is controlled airway
management, often in the OR,
with a skilled team ready to intubate.
With bacterial tracheitis, airway
management is still critical,
but you'll also need aggressive
sectioning, possible intubation,
and antibiotic therapy.
Now let's talk red flags.
Drooling, tripod positioning, and rapid
deterioration
point toward epiglottitis.
Copious secretions, worsening stridor
after a viral illness,
and poor response to standard croup
therapy suggest bacterial tracheitis.
Board tip.
If the question describes the child
sitting forward, drooling,
and refusing to swallow, think
epiglottitis.
If it describes thick secretions and a
sudden worsening after a cold,
think bacterial tracheitis.
Bottom line, both conditions can progress
quickly to airway obstruction.
Your role is early recognition, minimizing
risk,
and supporting rapid controlled airway
intervention.